JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
DONALD TRUMP, President of
the United States: I would say
I'm disappointed in what took
place.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The
showdown over health care
reaches a fever pitch.
President Trump slams Senate
Republicans, who can't win
enough support to replace or
repeal the Affordable Care Act.
Then: another Obama-era
legacy left standing.
The Trump administration
reluctantly certifies
Iran's compliance with
the nuclear deal, but
adds new sanctions over its
ballistic missile program.
And defying the odds.
An all-girls team from
Afghanistan competes
in a robotics contest
after being denied entry
into the U.S. twice.
FATEMAH QADERYAN, Student
(through translator): I
want to show the world
what Afghan girls,
or young girls, can do.
We can show them, when we have
a creative idea, we can do it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The latest Senate
Republican push to replace
the Affordable Care Act has
come to nothing.
Now party leaders say they
will try for just repeal.
Lisa Desjardins begins
our coverage of the past
tumultuous 24 hours.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Majority
Leader: I regret that the
effort to repeal and immediately
replace the failures
of Obamacare will
not be successful.
LISA DESJARDINS: A remarkable
statement and a bitter admission
for Senate Majority Leader
Mitch McConnell, that
Republicans still can't
muster the votes on
a health care bill.
It became clear last night,
after Utah's Mike Lee and Jerry
Moran of Kansas said they'd
vote against the
revised version.
With that, McConnell
changed course, and decided
to go for pure repeal.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL: A majority
of the Senate voted to pass
the same repeal legislation
back in 2015.
President Obama vetoed it then.
President Trump -- President
Trump will sign it now.
LISA DESJARDINS: McConnell
proposed delaying the effective
date of repeal for two years,
so both parties can
work out a replacement.
But, almost immediately, three
Republicans came out as no's
to McConnell's idea That's
enough to kill it.
Lisa Murkowski of Alaska,
Shelley Moore Capito
of West Virginia, and
Susan Collins of Maine
all said it is too risky
to repeal without an
immediate plan for what next.
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS (R), Maine: I
do not think it is going to be
constructive to repeal a law
that, at this point, is so
interwoven in our health care
system, and then hope that, over
the next two years, we
will come up with some
kind of replacement.
LISA DESJARDINS: At the same
time, Democrats are flexing
their muscles against repeal.
Minority Leader Chuck Schumer:
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY),
Minority Leader: Passing
repeal now is not a door
to bipartisan solutions,
as the majority leader
suggested this morning.
Rather, it is a disaster.
The door to bipartisanship
is open right now.
Not with repeal, but
with an effort to improve
the existing system.
LISA DESJARDINS: Even
though it seems certain
to fail, Republican
leaders said they're going
to press forward and hold
a vote some time soon.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL: Well,
I think we will have
to see what happens.
We will have demonstrated that
Republicans by themselves are
not prepared at this point
to do a replacement.
DONALD TRUMP, President
of the United States:
We're not going own it.
I'm not going to own it.
LISA DESJARDINS: At the White
House, President Trump was left
lamenting the latest health
care failure, and insisting
the fault lies elsewhere.
DONALD TRUMP: For seven years,
I have been hearing repeal
and replace from Congress.
And I have been hearing
it loud and strong.
And then, when we finally get
a chance to repeal and replace,
they don't take advantage
of it.
We will let Obamacare fail, and
then the Democrats are going
to come to us and they're going
to say, how do we fix
it, how do we fix it?
LISA DESJARDINS: As recently
as yesterday, Mr. Trump sounded
more confident, in a quick
aside to Vice President Pence.
DONALD TRUMP: We're
getting it together.
And it's going to
happen, right, Mike?
MIKE PENCE, Vice President of
the United States: Yes, sir.
DONALD TRUMP: I think.
(APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: Mr. Trump has
repeatedly said he's willing
to sign a repeal-only bill.
The vice president, who spent
much of the day on Capitol
Hill, urged lawmakers to do
something.
MIKE PENCE: Inaction
is not an option.
Congress needs to step up.
Congress needs to do
their job, and Congress
needs to do their job now.
LISA DESJARDINS: House
Speaker Paul Ryan sounded
a similar note, and also
said the House bill,
which repeals and replaces
Obamacare simultaneously,
is still -- quote --
"the best way to go."
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of the
House: Well, we'd like to see
the Senate move on something.
LISA DESJARDINS: And House
Budget Committee Chair Diane
Black joined the chorus urging
the Senate to act.
REP.
DIANE BLACK (R), Tennessee:
We're going to be eternally
optimistic that the Senate is
going to get their work done.
LISA DESJARDINS: Meanwhile, a
bipartisan group of 11 governors
called for the Senate to reject
efforts to repeal Obamacare
now and replace it later.
So, when we will see the
next votes in the Senate?
Senator John Cornyn, the number
two Republican in the Senate,
told my colleague Ellis Kim
(ph) and some other reporters
tonight he expects that
vote this week -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Lisa,
from what you're reporting, it
doesn't sound like they have
the votes to pass
repeal, so what are they
going to do after that?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right,
it's fascinating.
They're frantic to take a vote
now that likely will fail and
looks it like, Judy, after that,
they're ready for a
180-degree turn to move
from this closed-door
process they have had
until now for the past seven
months to a more open, public,
kind of regular process that,
as it's known here in the
Senate, with committee hearings.
Late tonight, the chairman
of the Health Committee
here in the Senate, Senator
Alexander, announced
he does plan to holding
open hearings on health
care and stabilizing
the markets, regardless
of the vote.
And, Judy, it's worth noting
those three senators who are the
no votes, who are essentially
blocking this latest effort from
Mr. McConnell, they're are all
senators who were not included
in the closed-door meetings.
Those female senators now
saying they think it should have
been open like this all along.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So,
Lisa, this is a big
hit for the Republicans
in the Senate and the
Congress overall.
What are they saying to you?
How do they feel about this?
LISA DESJARDINS:
They're very raw, Judy.
One of them told me that
they're just exhausted.
Another said today's meeting
of all Republican senators
was -- quote -- "robust."
Translation of that,
Judy, it was tense.
There is some real fear
about what this means for
their elections next year.
There are real questions
about what it means to hold a
vote that is likely to fail.
Why are they doing that?
Why does Mitch McConnell
want to hold the vote?
Well, the theory is that he
wants to show who is to blame
for blocking their repeal
efforts and to say they gave
it their best try, but that
idea could, of course, ricochet
and harm some of their
senators as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what about
Majority Leader McConnell?
Is his standing
secure after all this?
LISA DESJARDINS: Well,
one senator, Ron Johnson
of Wisconsin, made an
extraordinary statement
today, saying he doesn't have
confidence in Mitch McConnell
anymore and doesn't trust
his leadership.
But, Judy, he was an exception.
Other senators, including
Lisa Murkowski, told me they
do have confidence in him.
She gave a great quote
today, Judy, to us.
She said that Mitch McConnell
is trying to keep the frogs
in the wheelbarrow and doing
as well as he can.
Fascinating, because she's one
of the frogs that actually has
jumped out of that wheelbarrow,
but it looks like for now
his leadership will stay
and he will stay in power.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I
like the metaphor.
Lisa, what does all this
mean for health care?
Because the Republicans have run
several plans up the flagpole.
They haven't passed.
Where do they stand?
Where do we stand?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
This was the fifth draft, maybe
the sixth draft, depending
on how you count it this
year.
Let's just get to some
bottom lines for what we're
doling with now as Americans.
It looks like now the effort to
have massive Medicaid reform,
large-scale cuts in the numbers
of Medicaid recipients
in the future, that
effort now seems dead.
However, the fate of
the Medicaid expansion
under Medicaid -- under
the Obamacare, that
is not clear.
We will have to see what
happens in negotiations.
But, overall, Medicaid itself
will largely stay as it is now.
Also, the idea of repealing
Obamacare wholesale, that
seems unlikely to happen.
We will see what happens in
the next vote but it seems most
likely, Judy, that Obamacare
will stay largely within the
framework it has now and that
the discussion will shift
to how to fix it and
how to stabilize markets
within that framework.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And this -- you
and I were talking earlier,
this will have an effect
on the larger Republican
leadership agenda as well.
LISA DESJARDINS:
Oh, a huge effect.
They're hoping that it will not
be catastrophic, but now they
are jammed up against some very,
very limited time on
the calendar, Judy.
And they have some must-do
things like passing
spending bills, which,
as we know, is never
easy, but also a debt ceiling
limit that must be raised some
time in the next few months.
And in addition to
that, they are trying to
still pursue tax reform.
That is a once-in-a-generation
kind of achievement.
They're trying to do it in
this very kind of caustic,
sharp environment with health
care still waiting.
And it's unclear about what
of that will happen or when it
can all happen, but Republicans
say they're still going to try.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in just a
few seconds, Lisa, you were also
telling us today the Republicans
in the House rolled
out their budget.
LISA DESJARDINS: Yes.
This is something not to be
missed and would be a headline
probably in most other weeks,
but that's right.
This Republican budget document
is just a starting step in
spending process, but it's
important, Judy because
they're doing something
very new this year.
They are proposing cutting not
just discretionary subjects,
which are your usual government
agencies we talk about,
education and so forth,
but they want to cut
mandatory programs as
well in their budget.
Those are things like Social
Security, Medicare, food stamps.
They want to use those cuts
in those mandatory programs to
help things like the defense and
also for tax cuts, so
something to watch.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's
a lot to watch.
Lisa Desjardins, thank
you for being our eyes
and ears at the Capitol.
We thank you.
And in the day's other news:
It turns out that there was
an eighth person present when
Donald Trump Jr. met with a
Russian lawyer last summer.
The Washington Post
and others identify the
person as Ike Kaveladze.
He works for the Russian
real estate developer whose
son suggested the meeting.
The president's son
acknowledges that he
accepted because damaging
information was promised
on Hillary Clinton.
Reports this evening say that
President Trump and Russian
President Vladimir Putin had a
second meeting at the G20 summit
in Paris earlier this month.
That is in addition to the
more-than-two-hour session they
held that was widely publicized.
The second meeting had not
been disclosed previously.
The U.S. Treasury Department
slapped new sanctions
today on 18 individuals
and groups tied to
Iran's ballistic
missile program.
It came hours after the State
Department again certified
that Iran is complying with the
letter of its nuclear deal,
but not with the spirit.
We will have a full report
later in the program.
In Eastern Ukraine,
Russian-backed separatists
have proclaimed the
formation of a new state.
Rebel leaders said today that
the new state will include
areas they already control and
ultimately the rest of Ukraine.
But Ukrainian President
Poroshenko, during
a visit to Georgia,
dismissed the declaration
and called the separatists
puppets of Russia.
PETRO POROSHENKO, Ukrainian
President: They are
not political figures.
We are confident that we
reintegrate the Donbass,
we reintegrate the Crimea,
and we renew sovereignty
and territorial integrity,
no matter what Russia said.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The announcement
casts more doubt on the
future of the 2015 cease-fire.
China warned today of an all-
out confrontation with India
in a growing border dispute in
the Himalayas.
Each side accuses the other
of building up troops along a
contested region between China
and Bhutan, an ally of India.
The confrontation flared
recently after Indian
troops stopped Chinese
workers from building
a road in the area.
Back in this country, officials
today dropped two high-profile
cases involving shootings
by police.
A Cincinnati prosecutor
announced that he will not retry
former university policeman
Ray Tensing for a third time.
Tensing was accused of murder
and manslaughter in the killing
of a black motorist, Sam Dubose,
during a traffic stop.
Two previous trials
ended in hung juries.
JOE DETERS, Prosecutor: After
discussing this matter with
multiple jurors, both black and
white, and they have, to a
person, said to us that we
will never get a conviction in
this case.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Separately,
in Albuquerque, New Mexico,
federal prosecutors closed the
civil rights investigation
into the death of James Boyd,
a homeless man killed by police
in 2014.
They cited lack of evidence.
California's signature climate
initiative will stay in force
through at least the year
2030.
State lawmakers voted
on Monday to extend the
cap-and-trade program.
It limits carbon emissions
and lets polluters trade
or buy emissions permits.
The program had been
set to end in 2020.
On Wall Street today, the Dow
Jones industrial average lost
55 points to close at 21574.
The Nasdaq rose nearly
30 points, and the S&P
500 added one point.
And there's word that
China is censoring Winnie
the Pooh on social media.
It is aimed at comic
comparisons of the pudgy bear
with President Xi Jinping.
The forbidden list now includes
widely circulated images of Xi
strolling with then-President
Obama in 2013 juxtaposed with
Winnie the Pooh and Tigger,
and, from 2014, Xi shaking hands
with Japanese Prime
Minister Abe, alongside an
image of Pooh and Eeyore.
Who knew?
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
I talk with Senator Bernie
Sanders about what's next for
the Affordable Care Act; the
White House slaps new sanctions
on Iran; we catch up with the
Afghan girls robotics team
initially banned from coming
to the U.S.; and much more.
The collapse of the Republicans'
push on health care raises
serious questions about the road
ahead for reform, key
among them, will the
Democrats come to the table?
To explore that and more,
we are joined now by Senator
Bernie Sanders of Vermont.
He is the ranking member on
the Senate Budget Committee.
Welcome back to the
"NewsHour," Senator Sanders.
So, what happened to your
Republican colleagues?
What went wrong?
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS (I), Vermont:
Well, what went wrong, Judy, is
they brought forth a disastrous
health care bill that had the
support of all of 12 percent
of the American people, that
was opposed by the American
Medical Association,
the American Hospital
Association, the AARP.
And virtually every national
health care organization
understood that, when
you throw 22 million
people off of health insurance,
when you cut Medicaid by $800
billion, when you raise premiums
for older workers, when you
defund Planned Parenthood, and
you make it almost impossible
for people with preexisting
conditions to get the health
care they need and can afford,
you know what?
You have got a bill
that's a stinker, it
shouldn't go anyplace.
And it didn't go anyplace.
And that's a good thing
for the American people.
And I thank the millions
of people who stood up
and fought back and said
that that legislation
is not what this
country is about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, when the
president -- he did criticize
today the Republicans, but he
also blamed Democrats
and he said Democrats
are obstructionists.
They're only about obstructing.
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS: Well, if he
wants to blame me for helping
kill that bill, I accept that
responsibility completely.
This bill was an
absolute disaster.
Its goal was primarily to give
tax breaks to the rich and
to large corporations, rather
than to address the needs
of the American people.
If the president wants
to blame me and anyone
else for preventing 22
million Americans losing
their health insurance,
I accept that criticism.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So,
we're hearing, Senator
- - our Lisa Desjardins
was reporting the plan
now is if the vote for a pure
repeal goes down, which it's
expected to, the next step
is to go to committees, go
back to what is called regular
order, to work with Democrats.
Are you and others
Democrats prepared to
work with Republicans?
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS: Of course.
Why not -- look, nobody
has said, Judy, that the
Affordable Care Act is
anywhere near perfect.
It did add 20 million
more people to the
ranks of the insured.
That's good.
Deductibles, however,
are too high.
Co-payments are too high.
Premiums are too high.
And we pay by far the highest
in the world for prescription
drugs, getting ripped off
every day by the
pharmaceutical industry.
So, if the Republicans want
to sit town and say how do we
improve the Affordable Care
Act, not destroy it, how
do we improve it, let's
go forward and do that.
I have some very
specific ideas on that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well,
let's talk about that,
because, realistically,
you know where many
of the Republicans are.
We know where the Democrats,
you and others, are.
Where's the middle ground here?
Where do you see a
place for compromise?
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS:
Well, I'll tell you.
As I just mentioned, the cost
of prescription drugs in this
country is far, far higher than
in any other country.
You may recall that Donald Trump
as a candidate for president
talked about how he was going
to take on the pharmaceutical
industry and it was going to
lower prescription drug costs.
Well, we have some
ideas to do that.
Republicans may
have other ideas.
Let's talk about lowering
prescription drug costs,
saving the federal
government substantial
sums of money.
Let's talk about having
Medicare negotiate prices with
the pharmaceutical industry.
That's number one.
Number two, there are areas of
this country right now where
there are no insurance companies
offering the
Affordable Care Act.
Let us provide a public option
in every county in America, so
if people don't like what the
private insurance companies
are offering or there is no
offer, let them have at least
a public option.
Number three, I believe that
the American people would
very much like to see lowering
the eligibility age of
Medicare from 65 to 55.
And, lastly, in my view --
and I speak only for myself
-- the United States must join
the rest of the industrialized
world, guarantee health care
to all people as a right.
And that is why I will be
introducing a Medicare-for-all
single-payer programs.
It will not be passed, believe
me, in this session of Congress.
I know that.
But we have got to begin the
discussion as to why we spend
so much more per capita on
health care than any other
nation, why we pay the highest
prices in the world, why we
do not guarantee health
care to all people, as every
other major country does.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me
ask you about what is going
to happen in the meantime.
You mentioned
prescription drug prices.
You mentioned having a
public option in different
parts of the country.
But we know it's the case
that, in many states,
there is no insurance
company that is providing
coverage.
The Republicans like
to say the market, the
exchanges are collapsing.
What can be done in
the short term, Senator
Sanders, to shore these up?
Is there a way to come up
with subsidies that both
parties can agree to?
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS: Oh, yes.
Well, Judy, I think --
it's not me talking.
This is what the insurance
companies are saying.
What they're saying is,
there's great instability
in the marketplace,
precisely because of tweets
like the one President -- the
president sent out today: Let's
see the Obamacare act destroyed.
Well, that's not exactly a
strong sign of confidence going
out to the insurance companies.
So, what we have got to do
is, number one, we have to
enforce the individual mandate.
We're losing a lot of money that
is not coming into the system.
And, number two, we have
to deal with cost-sharing,
which is something we
have been doing many,
many years.
If you do that, I think
you will stabilize the
market for the short term.
But long term, longer term, we
have to improve the Affordable
Care Act, and longer term than
that we have to join the rest
of the world and guarantee
health care to all people as
a right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How much more
money is the federal government
going to have to put into
health care in order
for this to work?
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS: Well,
that's a very good question.
And I'm sure that there's
absolutely nobody in the world
who knows the answer to it.
All that I can say is that
we are spending far more per
capita than people in any other
country, and our health care
outcomes are in many cases worse
in terms of life expectancy,
infant mortality and so forth.
So, I think the issue is
not necessarily -- we may
have to spend more money.
The issue is to trying to figure
out why we end up spending so
much more than other countries.
And one of the reasons, clearly,
high cost of prescription drugs.
Second reason, we do
very, very badly in terms
of primary health care.
There are millions of people,
even those who have insurance,
who can not get to a doctor
when they are sick.
They end up in the emergency
room, very expensive.
They end up in the hospital,
very, very expensive.
If we greatly expanded primary
health care, lower the cost
of prescription drugs, we take
a giant step forward in lowering
health care costs in America.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, very quickly,
if you had to name one area
where you could see an early
agreement between Democrats
and Republicans on health
care, what would it be?
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS:
Prescription drugs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right,
we are listening to you,
Senator Bernie Sanders.
Thank you very much.
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, tomorrow
night, we are going to get a
Republican perspective, and
that will from Senator
Roger Wicker of Mississippi.
It has been two years since the
Iran nuclear deal was struck,
a central and controversial
part of the Obama
administration's legacy.
But President Trump has made
no secret of his dislike for
the agreement, and that is
one part of heightened
tensions with Iran.
William Brangham has more.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: My number one
priority is to dismantle the
disastrous deal with Iran.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: On the
campaign trail, candidate
Trump vowed to rip up the
international community's
agreement that curbed Iran's
nuclear program in exchange
for sanctions relief.
But, last night, President
Trump took the required step
of certifying whether Iran was
in fact complying with
its end of the deal.
And this was the second time
the Trump administration
certified it was.
State Department spokeswoman
Heather Nauert, while affirming
Iran's compliance, said they're
not off the hook.
HEATHER NAUERT, State Department
Spokeswoman: There are still
a lot of things Iran is doing
that are very troubling
to this administration.
And so we're going to try and
push on the Iranian regime to
stop its destabilizing activity.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In fact, the
president had to be convinced
by his national security team
Monday to agree to
this step, for now.
Simultaneously, the
administration maintained
a tough posture on Iran's
non-nuclear activities,
imposing fresh sanctions on
its ballistic missile program
and its most elite military
unit.
U.S. officials say Iran's
ballistic missile tests, its
support for the militant group
Hezbollah, and its
increasing harassment of
other nations' ships in
the Persian Gulf violate
the spirit of the nuclear
agreement, though they're
not expressly prohibited.
HEATHER NAUERT: Some of the
actions the Iranian government
has been involved with undermine
that stated goal of
regional and international
peace and security.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Iranian
Foreign Minister Javad Zarif
insists Iran is living up to the
nuclear bargain and that the
U.S. has run afoul of the deal
by adding these new sanctions
and discouraging companies
from investing in Iran.
MOHAMMAD JAVAD ZARIF, Iranian
Foreign Minister: Iran, in our
view, and in the view of the
IAEA, built trust
by implementing its
side of the bargain.
The United States didn't.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Zarif warned
that if this keeps up, Iran
could choose to pull out of
the deal itself.
Meanwhile, the U.S. says
it is reviewing its entire
Iran policy, even before
the next certification
deadline, which is
just 90 days away.
For more on the future of the
Iranian nuclear deal, I'm joined
now by our own Margaret Warner
and Nick Schifrin.
Welcome to you both.
Nick, I want to
starts with you first.
I know you have been reporting,
and several others have, that
President Trump certifying
that Iran was in fact
in compliance with the
deal was no easy matter.
Can you sort of explain,
what are the divisions
within the administration?
NICK SCHIFRIN: Yes, this
was a real struggle.
This time, we had what is
called the interagency process.
It took weeks to get to
the point where we were
about 12:00 yesterday.
And that process said the
president is ready to recertify
that Iran is in compliance.
The president said not so fast.
On one side, you have
the president, President
Trump, and his chief
strategist, Steve Bannon.
This is a larger struggle,
frankly, vs. -- the pragmatic
vs. the ideological sides of the
administration.
So, you have Trump and Bannon
on one side, and you have
most of the national security
establishment on the other side.
You have Secretary of
State Tillerson, Secretary
of Defense Mattis,
National Security Adviser
H.R. McMaster, Joint Chiefs
Chairman Joe Dunford.
And for the next five
or six hours, those two
sides were debating.
The president and Bannon
say, we don't like the deal.
It's not permanent.
And the deal is not
what Iran is about.
Iran is about the things that
your piece just mentioned,
ballistic weapons, not allowing
free access in the Gulf,
terrorist support across
the region, and that's
the larger problem.
The other side said, look, you
may not like everything that
Iran does, but the fact is
that those other issues are
not part of the deal and that
Iran is in compliance, and,
until it's not, you
have to recertify.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, Margaret,
help us out with that.
The argument is that if they're
not violating the letter of the
law, perhaps they're violating
the spirit of the law.
What's true and what is not?
MARGARET WARNER: It's true
that they are complying
with the letter of the law.
And the State Department
spokeswoman said it again today.
And there was no real
spirit of the law.
I mean, there's a phrase about
it's hoped that everyone will
be positive in the region
or something.
But the negotiators made
a deliberate decision
to corral, to only deal
with nuclear, because
they knew if they got
into ballistic missiles
or Iran's threat on
Israel and all the other
things you mentioned in
your piece, the whole
thing would fall apart.
There were some in
the administration who
had hoped that a more
benign environment would
result because they built this
working relationship, John Kerry
and Javad Sharif, though a very
senior official who did a lot
with Iran said to me, oh, me,
they are going to be actually
worse after the deal because
they want to prove to the
hard-liners that they're not
wimps and they're not weak.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The schism
that Nick is describing within
the Trump administration
is also reflected in a
schism within Iran itself.
President Rouhani was
elected initially to
open up negotiations
with the West, to deliver
on this deal.
He was recently reelected,
but that is not a
unanimous decision and
feeling within Iran.
MARGARET WARNER: No, it wasn't.
It wasn't certainly at the time.
He had to really -- Rouhani
and Supreme Leader Khamenei had
supported him, sort of, had to
really fight hard-liners.
Where I do think there is a
lot of unhappiness in Tehran is
the point that Zarif made, that
the money has not rolled
in as they expected,
meaning foreign investment.
I mean, part of it was, as
one person who had been very
involved said to me, oil was
$100 a barrel when they started
the negotiations, $40 after.
The energy companies aren't
exactly dying to rush in.
Their banks are almost,
I wouldn't say insolvent,
but a lot of bad loans.
So, the companies have to
be big enough to come in
and fund it all themselves.
And, finally, of course, there
are all these signals, and
they have gotten more intense
since the Trump administration
came in, far from encouraging
banks -- or at least John
Kerry used to travel around
with groups of aides saying,
look, here is how you can do
business, you won't run
afoul up the law -- the Trump
administration, that all ended.
And, instead, you have Tillerson
saying things that -- and
Trump saying things that make
the Iranians nervous and
foreign investors nervous.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, Nick, we
have this situation now where
the Trump administration says we
are going to do a
top-to-bottom review of
our Iran policy, 90 days
until the next certification
deadline.
What are we likely
to see coming up?
NICK SCHIFRIN: The president
doesn't like this deal.
That is very, very clear.
I had one official tell me
today he didn't think the
president would recertify in the
future.
And that is the perception among
a lot of people in this town.
What's going to happen now, as
you mentioned in your story,
the administration is going
to look at what it calls the
totality of the problem, so not
just review the nuclear deal,
but review all of
Iran's actions.
And that review will produce
some kind of paper, some kind of
guideline that will presumably
include whether they will
recertify in the next 90 days.
And if it comes out that the
administration doesn't want to
recertify, that really means
the deal is in absolute limbo.
If there's no recertification
in 90 days, Congress immediately
gets 60 days to either
vote it down or to change it.
Whatever Congress decides,
Iran will feel the pressure to
respond in kind, and you could
get a situation where the
deal collapses, we lose, the
U.S. loses access to the IAEA
information that the deal
allows in Iran, Iran restarts
its nuclear program, and we're
back to where we
were before the deal.
And that's a lot of ifs, but
those are exactly the ifs that
most of the national security
establishment is using to
try and convince President
Trump to stay in the deal.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All
right, Nick Schifrin,
Margaret Warner, thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
famine and drought
threaten Somaliland's
future; and what this
artist's paintings of
sunrises and sunsets
can teach us about life.
But first: An all-girls
team from Afghanistan
finally made it to the U.S.
this week to participate
in a robotics competition.
Their visas were denied twice
by American officials, until
criticism prompted President
Donald Trump to intervene
and reverse the decision.
The girls joined high school
students from more than 150
other countries, many of whom
had never seen or
made a robot before.
Jeffrey Brown will look at some
of the immigration policy issues
this is raising once again.
But we start with special
correspondent Kavitha Cardoza
of our partner Education Week.
She spoke to some of the Afghan
girls and other international
students in Washington,
D.C.
It's part of our weekly
series Making the Grade.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Hundreds
of high school students
arrived in Washington
from across the globe,
robotics teams from Jamaica to
Jordan, Canada to Australia.
There was even one
representing refugees.
But none of the students had a
more unlikely journey, perhaps,
than the crowd favorite.
MAN: Team Afghanistan.
KAVITHA CARDOZA:
Sixteen-year-old Kawsar
Roshan, one of the six girls,
says this was her proudest
moment.
KAWSAR ROSHAN, Student (through
translator): I was very happy,
and I was proud when the
people supported us.
I'm happy when people feel
that Afghans can do something.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: This robotics
competition is part of an
effort to get more young people,
particularly from
underrepresented countries,
to enter STEM fields.
It's a term used to include
science, technology,
engineering and math.
A few months ago, all teams
received boxes containing
hundreds of identical parts, and
the students had to figure
out how to take the wheels and
gears, sensors and sprockets,
and create a robot.
FATEMAH QADERYAN, Student
(through translator):
We have an old computer,
but often it doesn't
work.
KAVITHA CARDOZA:
Fatemah Qaderyan is from
the Herat province.
Almost 40 percent of
school-age children don't
have access to education.
Even when they do, there's
often a shortage of
teachers and textbooks.
For many Afghan girls, Fatemah
says even getting to school can
be a challenge, because they
need a man's permission.
FATEMAH QADERYAN (through
translator): We can't go alone.
And we need someone to support
us, like a man, to get us to
the school, or other places
we want to go.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Their
coach, Alireza Mehraban, says
technology is hard to come by.
ALIREZA MEHRABAN, Coach: We
don't have equipment of robotic.
We don't have it.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: He says even
though these girls were chosen
from more than 150 students,
because the team has no
experience in robotics, some
doubted their abilities.
ALIREZA MEHRABAN: They say you
can't, because it's impossible.
For girls in Afghanistan,
can't do this, really.
It's too hard for us.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: And what did
you say when they said that?
ALIREZA MEHRABAN: We
say, we can do it.
Just we say, we can do it.
Just give us a chance.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Then, after
they built their robot, their
visas were denied twice.
They were not given
any explanation.
FATEMAH QADERYAN (through
translator): When we
applied and were rejected,
we are so disappointed.
We are crying a lot
for six or seven hours.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Mehraban can
hardly believe they're here.
WOMAN: How do you feel
when everyone cheers
team Afghanistan?
ALIREZA MEHRABAN: What I have
to say, because the feeling
like I'm so happy, so happy.
I can't describe it best.
Really, I can't describe
it best, because a feeling
like I can't control myself.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Eighty percent
of these teams are made up
of boys, a gender gap that is
reflected in STEM
fields worldwide.
But the inequality in education
is far bigger than just STEM
subjects and Afghanistan.
Around the world, more than
60 million girls don't have
access to any education.
The reasons vary, from wars,
to cultural mores, to something
as simple as distance.
Melissa Lemus is
with team Honduras.
MELISSA LEMUS, Student (through
translator): Some of my friends
live about two hours from
the high school, or
they have to take a bus.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: While Gregine
Kumba Natt with team Liberia
says often they don't have
electricity during the day.
GREGINE KUMBA NATT, Student: We
need to charge the robots, but
in our country, we have poor
electricity.
We couldn't charge our phones
either, and because of that,
usually, we don't practice
at day.
We practice in the night hour.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: And like many
countries here, Ruby Balami
from team Nepal says her school
doesn't have a science lab, so,
initially, she was nervous when
she saw teams from developed
countries, such as
Japan and the U.S.
RUBY BALAMI, Student: We think
that they are much competitive,
and it was a scary thing,
but, coming here, making them
friends, now we have -- feel
much more better, and now
we are much more confident.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Some
last-minute tinkering
and intense discussions,
and then it was showtime.
Each country's team was paired
with two others, often not
speaking the same language.
Learning to collaborate and
communicate is part of the goal,
says Dean Kamen, the founder
of the competition,
FIRST Global Challenge.
DEAN KAMEN, Founder, FIRST
Global Challenge: You're the
first generation on this planet
that could grow up with
all of its kids knowing
each other, working
together, creating value,
so that you could all
have better lives, we
can have a better world.
And that's the
important thing here.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Fatemah
loved meeting students
from other countries.
She says she knows people think
of Afghanistan as a place of
violence and poverty, but she
wants to change that perception.
FATEMAH QADERYAN (through
translator): War like a habit
for us, because bomb blasting
and counterblasting and
killing people so normal for
us, because we see it a lot.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: She believes
the only way that can
change is through education.
Her mother stopped at grade
six, and even now more than
three million children, mostly
girls, are not
enrolled in school.
But someday, Fatemah wants to
get a Ph.D. in computer science.
FATEMAH QADERYAN (through
translator): Because I
need this, our country
needs this, to have
women educated, to be new
generation in the future.
I want to show the world
what Afghan girls, or
young girls, can do.
We can show them, when we have
a creative idea, we can do it.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: For
the "PBS NewsHour" and
Education Week, I'm Kavitha
Cardoza in Washington,
D.C.
JEFFREY BROWN: As Kavitha said,
the visa question for the Afghan
girls gained national attention
and the direct intervention
by President Trump.
Alan Gomez from USA Today
joins me now to talk about
that part of the story.
So, Alan, was this a
special case, an outlier?
What, if anything, does it
tell us about the current
situation with visas?
ALAN GOMEZ, USA Today:
Well, absolutely, this
was a complete outlier.
Understand that the Trump
administration has made clear
throughout its time that it will
handle any visa application
on a case-by-case basis,
exceptions can always be made.
But this case definitely
represents a very
sharp departure from
what has been a pretty
clear strategy from
this administration to
limit, to restrict, to
in some cases completely
suspend immigration from
terror-prone countries.
Now, understand that, you know,
we're still dealing with the
travel ban that the president
has been trying to implement
now for months that is directed
at six countries that have
been labeled as having very
close ties to terrorism.
He has completely suspended
the refugee program, all in
the name of national security.
And Afghanistan has
never been on any of
those lists of countries,
but, you know, I think
it would be pretty easy to make
a case that Afghanistan has a
bit of history with terrorism,
so that's why this case makes
it -- is so, so surprising
that it's threes girls from
Afghanistan that have been
allowed into the country.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, I wonder,
do we even know yet why they
were denied visas originally?
ALAN GOMEZ: No, the State
Department generally
discuss individual
cases and why it makes
individual determinations.
But when you think about
the overall posture of
this administration to
seriously scrutinize
any visas, any visa applications
that are coming from countries
with those ties to terrorism,
it follows that trend of
denying a lot of those visas
from people coming from those
countries.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, so
this case raises some -- plays
into some larger confusions
and that continuing controversy.
I want to ask you about one
other development in the visa
world that came yesterday.
The government announced they're
adding 15,000 new H-2B visas.
Now, explain what's
going on there.
ALAN GOMEZ: Yes.
And that's just another example
of why it's so difficult to
try to figure out sort of
what direction this
administration is going
when it comes to the
legal immigration system
in the United States.
Just a couple of months ago,
to give you some background,
the president ordered a total
review of the H-1B visa program.
Those are visas dedicated
to foreigners who are
trained in science,
technology, engineering,
mathematics.
They're used by technology
companies to bring in computer
scientists and programmers.
And the Trump administration
ordered a review of the program
because they believe that there
is too much fraud and that
these technology companies are
abusing that program to just
import cheaper labor.
So, we had that
as the background.
They talk about
American workers first.
And that's sort of the
posture that they have
been proceeding under.
JEFFREY BROWN: That's H-1.
That's the H-1.
Now, this is H-2, which
is for temporary workers.
ALAN GOMEZ: Right.
And then, all of a sudden,
yesterday, we get this
announcement that they
are going to approve
15,000 additional new
visas for H-2B visas, and
these are dedicated to
lower-skilled workers.
Think about people who work
in fisheries, in hotels, in
construction, in resorts, and
those are the kind of workers
that they're going to allow in.
The argument from the Trump
administration is that these
companies, a lot of them were
in very desperate need of
the labor, that they couldn't
find American workers to do
that job, so they needed to
bring in these additional
workers to do it.
But, again, it sort of goes
against what the administration
has been arguing for all these
months, that they are going
to limit the immigration
system to help American
workers and to reduce
the competition that they're
facing here in the country.
JEFFREY BROWN: All
right, ever evolving.
Alan Gomez, USA Today,
thanks very much.
ALAN GOMEZ: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The United
Nations has called it the worst
humanitarian crisis since 1945,
and, just today, the lead
editorial in The Washington
Post called it the worst crisis
you have never heard of.
Drought and famine threaten 20
million people in the war-torn
countries of Yemen, South
Sudan, and Somalia, as
well as drought-stricken
neighbors, such as Ethiopia.
This week, for the first
time, eight of the leading
U.S.-based international
relief organizations
are launching the Global
Emergency Response Coalition.
It's a joint fund-raising appeal
to the American public due to
the hunger crisis, which will
use social media to
amplify its message.
Special correspondent
Fred de Sam Lazaro
reports from the breakaway
region of Somalia known
as Somaliland.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: A glimpse
from our airplane window showed
the stark moonscape of drought
stretching for miles on
end, where many regions
in East Africa are at
risk of famine for the
third time in 25 years.
More than 360,000 children
are malnourished in Somalia;
70,000 of them are in critical
condition, according to the
World Health Organization.
We traveled to Somaliland,
a region that declared
itself independent of
Somalia more than two
decades ago.
Its capital, Hargeisa, has seen
an influx of mostly nomadic
livestock herders fleeing
the drought and in some
cases fighting in the
vast surrounding region.
They now live in
temporary camps.
Thirty-old-Year-old Hamda
Abdilahi Dhamac is the
mother of five children.
She came here after all of
her livestock, some 30 goats
and 50 sheep, died from the
drought.
HAMDA ABDILAHI DHAMAC,
Somaliland (through
translator): I used
to be part of a family
of livestock herders.
But now I have been forced
to come to this camp, where I
don't have enough money to buy
food and water.
I am really suffering.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: She gets
some money from relatives, but
says it's just enough to buy
rice and perhaps
an onion or tomato.
She can't afford beans or meat.
Like Dhamac, a majority
of Somalis make their
living by grazing animals.
But the drought has wiped out
70 percent of all livestock.
Dhamac says she doesn't know how
she will survive in the future.
HAMDA ABDILAHI DHAMAC
(through translator): I
don't have any hope now.
I don't have a
plan for my future.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Humanitarian
organizations are distributing
emergency food to ease the
crisis in the short-term.
Jeremiah Kibanya coordinates
relief efforts for World Vision.
JEREMIAH KIBANYA, World
Vision: We are providing
food commodities to the
people who right now
not having anything to eat.
We will need money to help
people get more animals into
their family and begin their
livelihood.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: How
much do you need, and what
percentage are you getting?
JEREMIAH KIBANYA: World Vision
has requested for about $37
million be able to respond.
And, so far, we have
received $11 million.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Most of
that money, $10 million, has
come from the U.S. government.
The Seattle-based agency is
helping deliver medical care
for those most vulnerable to
drought: pregnant
women and children.
At this clinic in the
village of Gabiley, babies
are measured and weighed.
A simple test with an
armband determines their
level of nutrition.
Yellow means moderate
malnutrition.
Red means severe.
If there's malnourishment,
the mothers are given packets
of peanut paste, along with
guidance to administer it only
to the sickest children, says
clinic director Asha Abdi Ali.
It's very difficult for a
mother if she has other children
who are hungry to not share
it?
ASHA ABDI ALI, Clinic
Director: We tell them
for the same reason.
It's that these other
children are not in need.
It is only for this child.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: But
it's still difficult?
ASHA ABDI ALI: It's
still difficult.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Keeping
people healthy is now made even
more difficult, ironically,
by rain.
Some rains have arrived this
year, and that's been enough
to green up the landscape.
But the effects of the
drought are going to linger
for a much longer time.
In fact, more immediately,
the threat to public
health is even greater.
That's because there are
millions of livestock
carcasses strewn all
over the landscape, and
what the rains do is
wash contaminants into
sources of drinking water.
On a hillside just outside
Dilla, a village about
an hour's drive from
the capital, carcasses
have become an unmanageable
problem for Mayor
Ibrahim Abdi Haji.
IBRAHIM ABDI HAJI, Mayor of
Dilla (through translator):
It is a bigger problem than we
can handle alone.
We have asked the government for
help to burn those dead animals.
But we haven't
received help yet.
We're afraid the community
will get waterborne
diseases from the animals.
We are very scared.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Water
which has collected at a nearby
earthen dam, has been completely
contaminated by both dead
and diseased animals.
JEREMIAH KIBANYA: And if people
use that water because of
desperation, and they don't have
any other water to drink, that
poses another threat again to
outbreak of waterborne diseases
to the communities.
That can lead to outbreaks
of diseases like acute
water diarrhea or cholera.
MAN: I want to show you
the best way of making
your water clean and safe.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: As a
short-term solution, World
Vision has distributed
some 75,000 filters
and chlorine tablets, so
people can purify their water.
But World Vision's
Kibanya says the other
issues, food shortages,
limited medical services
and lack of jobs, are
tougher ones to tackle.
There's a tradition
in this region, where
droughts are localized,
that communities welcome
people temporarily displaced
by the dry conditions.
But one of Dilla's newcomers,
Roda Yusaf, a mother of seven,
isn't sure she can return
to her former livelihood
without animals.
She plans to stay in
Dilla indefinitely.
RODA YUSAF, Somaliland (through
translator): When you come from
another area, it's difficult
to get a job here.
But the community has
been very supportive.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Six years
ago, Dilla was in a similar
position of hosting displaced
persons from a severe famine
which ended up killing
260,000 people in Somalia.
Mayor Haji hopes that
doesn't happen again.
It seems to be a tradition
here for sharing and helping
people who are in distress in
the tribe.
After some time, does
that become difficult?
IBRAHIM ABDI HAJI (through
translator): We are starting
to reach that point.
The last time we supported
displaced people who
had come here, everybody
ended up suffering.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The repeated
cycles of drought over the
past 25 years is constantly
on the minds of aid workers
and political leaders.
Saad Ali Shire is
Somaliland's foreign minister.
SAAD ALI SHIRE, Somaliland
Foreign Minister: We need to
look into the future and build
resilience, so when the drought
comes next time -- and it
will come, because these are
now more severe and
more frequent, because
of the climate change.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: He
says much greater long-term
investment must be made
to improve the region's
viability.
SAAD ALI SHIRE: We need
to change the way we raise
livestock in this country.
We very much follow --
we raise livestock as we
raised it 200 years ago.
It's a nomadic way.
I think we need to settle
and grow food for livestock.
But we also need, I think, to
orient part of our population
towards fishing and other
activities, industry, services.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: However,
that seems unlikely,
at least in the short
term, given that urgent
appeals to deal with the
immediate needs have fallen far
short of what the U.N. and aid
agencies have requested.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Fred de Sam Lazaro reporting
from Dilla, Somaliland.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Fred's
reporting is a partnership
with the Under-Told
Stories Project at the
University of St.
Thomas in Minnesota.
A new exhibit, Sunrise, Sunset,
by Swiss artist Nicolas Party,
recently opened at the Hirshhorn
Museum in Washington, D.C.
Party, known for his large works
of public art, painted directly
on 400 feet of the museum's
circular walls.
We tracked his progress
over two weeks.
Party told the "NewsHour" he
was inspired by the notion
that, no matter what happens,
the sun will rise
in the morning.
NICOLAS PARTY, Artist: I was
aware of the circle shape of the
building, and that influenced
my decision.
So I decided to do a show about
sunsets and sunrises, which is
this kind of end and beginning
that happens every day, but
also implied this idea of this
very, very long timeline that
just shows the rotation of
every element in the universe.
And let's give a perspective
of maybe, like, seeing history
and things in a much bigger
way, and maybe not being
always focused on the daily.
The circle aspect really
defines the project.
And then, after, I'm trying
to kind of build up a
rhythm into this space.
Every wall is a different
color, but also every shape of
the paintings that I'm doing
on the wall also has a different
format to give like a rhythm
and an energy to the wall.
I like to improvise.
So there's an element of freedom
when I work on the walls.
So I use the wall almost
as a piece of paper.
Sometimes, of course, I have
sketches, but, yes, I work
very organically, so there's an
element of surprise.
It's really exciting.
I mean, yes, it's really
exciting to have all this space.
In a matter of seven
days, I will do like
30 different paintings.
A lot of art that I love, they
feel really alive and energetic.
And so you need to be in that
stage when you're doing them.
A lot of landscape painting.
I have been obviously
painting sunsets and sunrises.
It's the only moment
during the day that you
can really see, visually,
how the entire universe
functions.
You can really see the rotation
of Earth at that moment.
Right now, we can't see it.
But during those 30 minutes
of a sunset or a sunrise, you
can actually feel it, and you
can see it very clearly.
And all those kind of different
reasons that the color change
the sky, that's the physical
reaction of the light
going through different
kind of angles and stuff.
And I thought
that's fascinating.
Obviously, the daily life
and our little preoccupations
that are very important,
but so it's interesting
to put them in perspective
with this big thing.
There's very different stages
when I do those murals.
There's like the beginning
that is very slow and
allow myself a lot of time.
Then there's a moment when it's
-- everything is beginning to
build up, and I realize, oh,
I made mistakes in the
placements or the size,
colors or whatever.
It's getting very stressful.
And so then there's a
moment it's very difficult,
usually, because it's
not going how I want
to go.
Also, just like coming to
a space, doing something
and this thing will
disappear or more or less
being covered up, so it will
still be here, but it will be
covered by a layer of paint.
It's like ruins
that are underneath.
Like the cave painting, you
don't see, but I'm sure there's
a lot of them that we don't
see or we don't know about,
but still they exist.
There's very different steps
between the moment you start, to
run to the moment it's extremely
difficult, to the end, when
you feel totally fine just
running through the line.
And it's all those moments
that are very exciting,
yes, to look forward to do.
You don't need to
change the world.
You can just change your
few meters around you.
And so I did change the circle.
That's what I did.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Later tonight
on PBS: an inside look
at life out of prison.
"Frontline" teams up with The
New York Times for the film
"Life on Parole" for a look at
Connecticut's push to
keep people from returning
to life behind bars.
MAN: I have been coming to
prison since 1999 now, and I
have been in and out of jail 11
times.
MAN: This time I got out,
it was the first time
that I was on parole.
MAN: Brantley (ph).
MAN: I was definitely
frightened.
I didn't know what to expect.
MAN: Sentence less
than four years.
NARRATOR: Errol's parole
officer is Mark Polich (ph).
He's been a parole
officer for 18 years.
So, what was your
crime over there?
MAN: Burglary.
Is that kind of your thing or...
MAN: No, at all.
I was -- for drugs.
MAN: All right, and
the drug of choice is?
MAN: Heroin.
MAN: Mr. Brantley, you can
just read, had a long, long
history of opiate addiction.
And if you're in this business
long enough, you know the
chances are at some point it
will rear its ugly head.
So, now he's on your watch,
so you have got to make sure
you're dotting I's and crossing
T's.
That's for sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: "Frontline"'s
"Life on Parole" airs
tonight on most PBS stations.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: Seattle made headlines
for its substantial minimum
wage hike, now as high
as $15 an hour for some.
A new study, commissioned by
the city itself, has found that
the boost has cost jobs for
the lowest-wage workers.
We asked an economist and an
entrepreneur to share their
takes, which you can find on
our Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that is the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again
right here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.